CHAOS-5107 Update tutorial of chaos experiment from a blank canvas (#6341)
harness/developer-hub: docs/chaos-engineering/get-started/tutorials/chaos-experiment-from-blank-canvas.md

---
title: Create chaos experiment from a blank canvas
description: Create a chaos experiment from scratch.
sidebar_position: 3
redirect_from:
  - /tutorials/chaos-experiments/chaos-experiment-from-blank-canvas
---

In this tutorial, you will create chaos experiments from scratch and execute them on the sample boutique application.

> This experiment follows the same steps of [your first chaos experiment](/docs/chaos-engineering/get-started/tutorials/first-chaos-engineering.md) by creating a chaos environment, and infrastructure and using the same boutique application by targeting the pods of the `cart` microservice, except the way you create an experiment. Creating a chaos experiment involves the following steps:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This experiment follows the same steps of [your first chaos experiment](/docs/chaos-engineering/get-started/tutorials/first-chaos-engineering.md) by creating a chaos environment and infrastructure and using the same boutique application by targeting the pods of the `cart` microservice, except the way you create an experiment. Creating a chaos experiment involves the following steps:
```

2. Create an environment;
3. Create a chaos infrastructure;
4. Create a chaos experiment.

In the last step, instead of choosing a pre-defined experiment, you will choose from a variety of experiments. This way of choosing a chaos experiment from a list will set the foundation for you to understand how to execute different experiments on different platforms with varied targets based on your requirements.

## Before you begin

* [What is chaos engineering?](/docs/chaos-engineering/get-started/overview.md)
* [Prerequisites to execute chaos experiments](/docs/chaos-engineering/get-started/tutorials/prerequisites.md)
* [Execute your first chaos experiment using a template](/docs/chaos-engineering/get-started/tutorials/first-chaos-engineering.md)

### Step 1: Set up environment and infrastructure

1. Follow the steps to set up [your environment](/docs/chaos-engineering/get-started/tutorials/first-chaos-engineering#step-2-add-a-chaos-environment) and [chaos infrastructure](/docs/chaos-engineering/get-started/tutorials/first-chaos-engineering#step-3-add-a-chaos-infrastructure).

### Step 2: Construct a chaos experiment from a blank canvas

> 2. Once you have your environment and chaos infrastructure in place, you can create a chaos experiment. To create an experiment, navigate to **Chaos Experiments** in the sidebar menu and click **New Experiment**.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. Once you have your environment and chaos infrastructure in place, you can create a chaos experiment. To create an experiment, navigate to **Chaos Experiments** in the left nav, and then select **New Experiment**.
```

![create new experiment](./static/first-chaos/create-new-experiment-1.png)

> 3. Specify the experiment name and a description (optional) and tags (optional). Choose the target infrastructure, click **Apply**, and click **Next**.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. Specify the experiment name, description (optional), and tags (optional). Choose the target infrastructure, click **Apply**, and click **Next**.
```

![specify parameters](./static/first-chaos/specify-params-2.png)

4. In the Experiment Builder, select **Blank Canvas** and click **Start with blank canvas**.

![blank canvas](./static/chaos-experiment-from-blank-canvas/blank-canvas.png)

> 5. This will lead you to the page where you can add chaos faults to your experiment. Click **Add**.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
5. This opens the page where you can add chaos faults to your experiment. Click **Add**.
```

![click add](./static/chaos-experiment-from-blank-canvas/add-experiments.png)

6. Search for **"pod delete"** in the search bar and select "Pod Delete" fault from the result of the search.

![select fault](./static/chaos-experiment-from-blank-canvas/select-fault.png)

7. Add details in the **Target Application** tab, such as the `hce` namespace, `app=cartservice` label, and application kind `deployment`.

![target app](./static/chaos-experiment-from-blank-canvas/target-app.png)

> 8. In the **Tune Fault** tab, specify **total chaos duration** as 30, **chaos interval** as 5, **pods affected perc** as 50, and the default weight to 10.

Reviewer: Are these UI elements all lowercase? If not, suggest matching the case in the UI.

![Tune Fault](./static/chaos-experiment-from-blank-canvas/tune-fault.png)

:::tip

> The `pods affected perc` describes the percentage of pods that are affected due to the unexpected pod deletion. A minimum of one pod is deleted.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The **pods affected perc** describes the percentage of pods that are affected due to the unexpected pod deletion. A minimum of one pod is deleted.
```

:::

### Step 3: Create a new HTTP probe
8. In the **Probes** tab, you can create a new probe. For this, click **Select or Add new probes**.

![Probes Config](./static/first-chaos/probes-config.png)

9. Select **New probe**.

![new probe](./static/chaos-experiment-from-blank-canvas/new-probe.png)

> 10. Select **Kubernetes** as the infrastructure type, and **HTTP** as the probe type. This leads you to the probe configuration screen.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
10. Select **Kubernetes** as the infrastructure type, and **HTTP** as the probe type. This opens the probe configuration screen.
```

Reviewer: Suggest matching the case of the UI. Is it probe configuration?

11. Specify the name of the probe, description (optional), and tag (optional). Click **Configure Properties**.

![configure probe](./static/chaos-experiment-from-blank-canvas/configure-3.png)

12. Specify the timeout as 5s, attempt as 2, and interval as 10s. Click **Configure Details**.

![probe properties](./static/chaos-experiment-from-blank-canvas/properties-4.png)

13. Enter the URL as `http://frontend/cart` which is the URL for the cart page.

![probe url](./static/chaos-experiment-from-blank-canvas/url-5.png)

14. Specify the method as `GET` so that the probe can make GET requests at the URL specified earlier. Select **Compare response code**, criteria as **==**, and response code as `200` for the successful validation of the probe. Click **Setup Probe**.

![response](./static/chaos-experiment-from-blank-canvas/response-6.png)

15. Once you create a probe, click it, and select **Add to Fault**.

![add to fault](./static/chaos-experiment-from-blank-canvas/add-to-fault.png)

16. Select mode as **Continuous** and click **Apply changes**.

![continuous](./static/chaos-experiment-from-blank-canvas/continuous-mode.png)

> 17. Click **Apply changes** again to confirm all parameters configuration. Click 'X' to close the overlay modal. Click **Apply changes** again.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
17. Click **Apply changes** again to confirm all parameters configuration. Click **X** to close the overlay modal. Click **Apply changes** again.
```

![apply changes](./static/chaos-experiment-from-blank-canvas/apply-changes.png)

### Step 4: Verify cart page health

18. Before executing the experiment, verify that the cart page is healthy and accessible from the front end, as seen at the `/cart` route.

![Online Boutique App Cart](./static/chaos-experiment-from-blank-canvas/online-boutique-app-cart.png)

### Step 5: Observe chaos execution

> 19. When all the prerequisites are fulfilled and parameters are set, you can start the experiment execution by selecting **Run** on the top right corner of the screen.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
19. When all the prerequisites are fulfilled and parameters are set, you can start the experiment execution by selecting **Run** .
```

Reviewer: Recommend avoiding directional language when possible.
https://developers.google.com/style/translation#general-dos-and-donts

![Run and save](./static/first-chaos/run-n-save.png)

> 20. You can see that once you click **Run**, an experiment run is scheduled. You can see the status of every step in the tab.

Reviewer: This isn't a step. Indent so the content is inline with the steps? Make it an info note?
